# p5.touchgui

[*p5.js*](https://p5js.org) is a wonderfully accessible way for students and creative minds to both learn computer programming and create interactive art and experiences. 

[*p5.touchgui*](https://github.com/L05/p5.touchgui) is intended to extend *p5.js* and make it easy to add buttons, sliders, and other GUI (graphical user interface) objects to *p5.js* sketches, enabling users to focus on quickly iterating ideas with easily created GUI objects that work with both mouse and multi-touch input.

## > Process


### Research
My first step in working on *p5.touchgui* was to research GUI design methodologies and examples. I looked at the current state of UI within *p5.js*, which seemed to depend entirely on DOM elements. I performed a number of informal tests with DOM elements and multi-touch screens, and it seemed DOM elements were not well suited to multi-touch environments: the performance was often slow and touch quality inconsistent. In addition, while *p5.dom* gave access to DOM elements, it felt clunky. Having observed students trying to use DOM elements in their sketches, *p5.dom* often seemed a pain point for many.

I became especially interested in learning about [Immediate-Mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immediate_Mode_GUI) and [Retained-Mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retained_mode) approaches to Graphical User Interfaces. [This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z1qyvQsjK5Y) of a presentation by Casey Muratori on Immediate-Mode GUIs was particularly illuminating, and I decided to dive into creating *p5.touchgui* as an Immediate-Mode GUI.

### Immediate-Mode p5.touchgui

I first implemented a version of *p5.touchgui* using an Immediate-Mode approach. Here is an [example](https://editor.p5js.org/L05/sketches/7yMYNgJyM) of that version in action.

In many ways, it felt simple and easy-to-use. The GUI Objects were not stored anywhere; they were fed a variable when drawn, and they modified that variable by reference based on user input. Here's what some code looked like in the Immediate-Mode version:

```javascript
let x;

function setup() {
    createCanvas(400, 400);
    createGui();

    x = {val: 0.5};
}

function draw() {
    background(220);
    startGui();

    if (button("Button 1", 50, 50)) {
        print("Button 1 pressed.");
    }

    endGui();
}
```

**Pros**
* Accessing GUI object states in the `draw()` loop seemed like an exciting idea for teaching beginners.
* No GUI object states had to be stored, retained, or synchronized.
* It was entirely data driven.

**Cons**
* Required the creation of JavaScript objects in order for pass-by-reference to work. This is an advanced concept to have to introduce to beginners.
* Would be difficult to offer custom styling.
* Multi-touch input would not work well with a strictly Immediate-Mode GUI. This was obviously kind of a deal breaker.

### Rethinking p5.touchgui

While I really liked some aspects of Immediate Mode GUI (IMGUI), I realized a purely IMGUI approach would not offer the functionality necessary to the goals of *p5.touchgui*. I began to ask: how can I adapt some features of IMGUI (such as having access to GUI object states) to a more flexible and comprehensive GUI system?

I ended up creating a Retained-Mode GUI that mimicked some behaviors of an IMGUI. For instance, users can access GuiObject member variables such as `button.isPressed`, which returns a `Boolean` value describing if the button is in fact pressed.

I was also able to account for both mouse and multi-touch input by creating callback event handlers specifically for the library. These custom handlersnot only enable expected mouse behavior such as hover states and multi-touch control of GUI objects, but they don't interfere at all with the *p5.js* input event callbacks (i.e. *mousePressed()*, *touchStarted()*, etc.). Basing the input processing on an event-based system is also significantly more performant than calculating inputs during every single frame.

By switching to a Retained-Mode approach, I was able to begin implementing stylization of GuiObjects, build out a small set of presets, and provide user-accessible functions for modifying object styles.

Here's what some code looks like now:

```javascript
let gui;
let b;

function setup() {
  createCanvas(400, 400);
  
  gui = createGui();
  b = createButton("Button", 50, 50);
}

function draw() {
  background(220);
  drawGui();

  if(b.isPressed) {
    print(b.label + " is pressed.");
  }
}
```

## > Next Steps

There are a few areas in which I look forward to further developing *p5.touchgui*.

### Accessibility

I learned at the *p5.js Contributors Conference 2019* that *p5.js*, and by extension *p5.touchgui*, is very inaccessible to screen readers. On further reflection, this is not surprising given that *p5.js* is essentially manipulating a Canvas object, which is a buffer of pixels. This pixel buffer and the elements within it inherently carry none of the data that screen readers can usually access in DOM elements.

I am interested in working with the *p5.js* community to find ways of making both *p5.touchgui* and *p5.js* more accessible, whether through providing off-screen shadow DOM structures or through solutions such as the Accessibility Object Model (AOM).

### Style

Style is one area where *p5.touchgui* needs more work; turns out, it's hard! The presets are a good start, and it is possible to stylize individual objects, but the number of lines of code it would take to build out a larger interface still seem extraneous.

Some features I think would help:
* Group styling - i.e. determining the style of an entire object class. This will be the very next feature added to the library.
* Simplified style properties - the properties currently get pretty granular, which on one hand gives a lot of color control and on the other means that a non-trivial number of properties need to be set. I am interested in the way Material UI has primary and secondary color choices, for instance.
* More presets!

### Additional GuiObjects and Features

There are a number of additional features I would like to work on:

* More GuiObjects
    * Radio Button
    * Color Picker
    * Button Bank
    * Slider Bank
    * Range Slider
    * Text Field
* Tags (grouping GuiObjects by tag)
* Selective Input Lock (right now all GuiObjects default to input lock)
* Migrate reference documentation to Docsify model.
* More examples!

You can also check out my [development notes](https://github.com/L05/p5.touchgui/blob/master/docs/NOTES.md).

## > Support

Any questions pertaining to this project may be addressed via Issues on the [p5.touchgui GitHub repository](https://github.com/L05/p5.touchgui). Simply create a new Issue and either assign or tag me in the conversation with [@L05](https://github.com/L05). For anything else, don't hesitate to get in touch at carlosga@gmail.com!

## > Acknowledgements

I'd like to give an extra special thanks to my GSOC mentor Yining Shi for her support, guidance, understanding, and encouragement throughout the project. I'd also like to thank Lauren McCarthy thinking through some of the pedagogical applications of *p5.touchgui* as I worked on it. Finally, thank you to all of the contributors and community members of p5.js and the Processing Foundation who make *p5.js* such a fantastic resource!




